Is it possible to rejoice
despite experiencing difficult trials?
Thus far, we’ve seen how the apostle Paul
maintained his joy despite tribulation,
distress, persecution, or even hunger.
And no doubt this has been
an encouragement to you because many of you
have or are
going through those very things.
But what about situations
where we lose everything
because of disasters or civil unrest?
Can Paul’s experience help us in that?
Our theme scripture at Romans 8:35
quotes Paul,
stating that not even “nakedness”
can “separate us
from the love of the Christ.”
And Paul had firsthand experience
with that as well.
Turn, please, to 2 Corinthians 11:27.
And notice how he describes his trials
at 2 Corinthians 11:27
as being “in labor and toil,
in sleepless nights often,
“in hunger and thirst,
frequently without food,
in cold and lacking clothing,”
or “nakedness,” as the footnote says.
Now, Paul’s lack of clothing
was not due to laziness on his part.
We know from the Scriptures that Paul
worked hard to care for his needs.
But, rather, being cold and lacking clothing
was due to things
he experienced in his ministry.
For example, remember the occasion
when Paul was on board the ship
that was driven and shipwrecked
by that most violent wind
on the Mediterranean.
As the ship broke to pieces,
Paul and the others
hung on to pieces of wood
and the pieces of the ship,
and they may have reached land
with little or no clothing on.
In fact, remember the people of Malta
had to build a fire
to warm the cold survivors.
On other occasions, Paul escaped for his life
with just the clothes on his back.
At other times, he was beaten or stoned,
which surely ripped his clothes to shreds.
And at Acts 16:22,
we read of the account
where “the civil magistrates,”
it says, “after tearing
the garments off [of Paul],
gave the command to beat [him] with rods,”
and then “threw [him] into prison.”
Well, these accounts help us
to better understand Paul’s words
at 1 Corinthians 4:11
—1 Corinthians 4:11.
He says: “Down to this very hour
“we continue to hunger and thirst
and to be poorly clothed
and to be beaten
and to be homeless.”
But despite these circumstances,
what did Paul encourage
his fellow Christians to do?
Look at verse 16.
He says: “I urge you, therefore,
become imitators of me.”
See, he encouraged them to imitate
his example—rejoice despite trials.
At Romans 12:12,
we read where he tells us to:
“Rejoice in the hope. . . .
Share with the holy ones
according to their needs.”
See, Paul was able to rejoice and help others
even when experiencing great loss himself.
Now, many of our dear brothers and sisters
have been affected by terrible disasters.
Just consider a few over the past year:
earthquakes in Albania,
the Philippines,
Puerto Rico, and elsewhere;
severe flooding in Congo,
Spain, the United States;
hurricanes and typhoons
in the Bahamas and the Philippines;
terrible fires in Australia
and the United States.
And the list goes on and on.
And, see, the result of these
and many other disasters
is that our brothers and sisters,
some of you,
have had to flee their homes
in the middle of the night
with just the clothes on their backs.
Or in other situations, the disaster
destroyed all of their belongings.
It pains us when we hear those reports.
And you dear brothers and sisters
who are going through these things,
please know that we
keep you in our prayers.
But even in those circumstances,
our brothers continue to rejoice.
How is that possible?
Well, as you watch the following video,
note which provisions
helped our brother and sister
to rejoice despite a period
of inadequate clothing.
Well, one thing you have to understand
about living in New York City
is that it’s a very fast-paced life.
So you’ve got to keep up with that lifestyle.
We were doing pretty fine,
and we were
happy pioneering, working
—just trying to survive in New York.
One of the things that you
usually have to worry about
is your safety
—being careful of your surroundings.
But hurricanes are just something
we never considered;
it’s something we
never had to worry about.
The day when we first heard the warning,
it was raining outside and kind of windy.
We saw the water coming into the parking lot
where our apartment was, and that’s when
I realized something was about to happen.
We got out with the clothes on our back.
It was just total devastation.
You lose everything
—one single night.
I never had any thought that water
would come into our place and destroy
everything from our material possessions
to our clothes.
And I truly felt
what it was like to be destitute.
It just broke my heart.
And all I could do
was wonder, ‘Where do my wife
and I go from here?’
Our assembly was scheduled for that weekend.
I didn’t even have
a suit jacket or a tie.
I think I probably took for granted
something as simple as clothing.
I always had it.
But the brothers and sisters stepped in
to assist in so many different ways.
I heard a knock on the door that Friday
—three suits
and shoes!
They purchased clothing for us.
It was a most unbelievable experience.
These friends gave us big hugs
and gave us envelopes.
We are fully convinced
we were clothed by Jehovah’s love.
We were able to go to our assembly
and enjoy taking in spiritual food,
even though we were in that situation.
Even though we lost everything physically,
we were still able to keep on pioneering,
which we have been doing up to this day.
Jehovah made a promise.
If we keep seeking
first his Kingdom,
everything else he will take care of.
And that’s where my joy comes from.
No matter what type of tribulation
you go through in your life,
and even if it’s to the point of nakedness,
it will never ever be able to stop
or cut off the relationship
that we have with our God, Jehovah.
Did you notice what helped this couple?
They lost everything in one night.
They were unsure what they would do,
how they would go on.
But did you notice their resolve?
Remember, Brian said, ‘No matter
what tribulation we experience,
‘even to the point of nakedness,
it will never cut us off
from our relationship with Jehovah.’
They were touched by how
their brothers stepped in to help them.
They kept their hope in Jehovah
and the future alive.
Well, what do we learn from this?
We learn that when we
are going through trials,
even those trials that cause us
to lose our possessions
or be inadequately clothed,
we can maintain our joy
because of the three things
we’ve been discussing:
maintaining our relationship with Jehovah,
receiving relief from our brotherhood,
and holding fast to our hope.
Now, many of you immediately respond
to help your brothers and sisters
when you see a need,
and we appreciate that so much.
Disasters are on the increase,
both in frequency and intensity,
and thus the need to provide relief
for our brothers continues to increase.
And we commend you
and thank you for what you do.
Why, some of you volunteer
to go into areas to help.
For example, after Hurricane Dorian
in the Bahamas,
Witness pilots transported
more than 700 volunteer workers
into those affected areas.
Others of you assist your brothers
and sisters right in your own area.
For example,
in Congo, many of our brothers
had to flee their homes and villages
with just the clothes on their backs
because of civil unrest.
With all their possessions
and livelihood gone,
what would they do?
Well, their brothers and sisters
in neighboring congregations,
even though they had limited means,
provided money,
food, clothing, and even housing
for their displaced brothers.
In Bolivia and Venezuela,
congregations shared meals
or did a local distribution of food.
And look at how
our brotherhood has stepped in
during this COVID-19 pandemic,
providing food supplies,
relief supplies, emotional support,
spiritual support—congregations
and families helping one another out.
And, see,
because of your self-sacrificing spirit
and your generous donations,
you are a blessing
to your brothers and sisters
all around the world.
And what a slap
in the face this is to Satan!
Why do we say that?
Well, you’ll remember that at Job 1:11,
Satan insulted Jehovah
—and all of us who love Jehovah—
by insinuating that we would turn our back
on Jehovah when going through trials.
Let’s look at that at Job 1:11.
He says: “But, for a change,
stretch out your hand
“and strike everything he has,
and he will surely curse
you to your very face.”
See, Satan was convinced that when it
came to losing our possessions
or staying loyal to Jehovah,
we would choose our possessions.
Satan was convinced that when it
came to helping ourselves
or helping somebody else,
we would choose ourselves.
How wrong he was!
How angry he must be
when he sees what is happening
in Jehovah’s organization today!
So, what do we need to do?
Keep making him angry.
Continue to help your brothers
and sisters in need.
And when we do, not only do we gain happiness
but we help our brothers to rejoice as well.
So, dear friends,
may all of us be determined
to keep our joy alive
by doing those three things:
maintaining our relationship
with Jehovah,
recognizing the love
and support of our brotherhood,
and meditating
on our precious hope.
And never forget,
when we continue to loyally serve
Jehovah despite nakedness
—despite losing all of our possessions—
we make Jehovah’s heart glad.
And that is one
of our greatest reasons for rejoicing.
Now Brother Ralph Walls,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will present the next talk of this symposium,
“We Can Rejoice Despite . . . Danger.”